Add best practices for Commodore Packages (#160)
projectsyn/documentation: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/explanations/commodore-packages.adoc

= Commodore Package Best Practices

Commodore Configuration Packages provide a way of reusing configuration presets for one or more components.

In this document we provide a few best practices for writing packages.
While adhering to these practices isn't mandatory, it makes using packages more consistent and allows Syn tooling, such as the https://github.com/projectsyn/commodore-renovate[Commodores Renovate extension], to interact with them.

== Structure

The structure of Commodore Packages is a lot less rigid than for Commodore Components.
The only constraint is that they need to provide one or more reclass classes in the form of YAML files.

> However, to have some consistent feel when using and working on packages we recommend a basic structure:

Reviewer: I found your sentence kinda hard to read, but I'm not sure my suggestion is better.

```suggestion
However, to give packages a consistent look and feel for users and developers we recommend a basic structure:
```

* A `common.yml` class that includes the base configuration and the parameter defaults (see parameters section below)
* A class for every supported distribution (for example `openshift4.yml`) that imports and extends the `common.yml` class
* A `docs/` folder containing the Antora documentation for the package
* A `tests/` folder containing golden tests for the package

> With this structure a package user only has to import a single class `<package-name>.<distribution>` and can expect a working configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this structure, a package user only has to import a single class `<package-name>.<distribution>` and can expect a working configuration.
```

Further a package has to provide the complete component dependency declaration, including `url` and `version`, and can't depend on them being provided by global defaults.

This is necessary for packages to be able to be compiled independently and to avoid unexpected dependencies.

[source,yaml]
----
applications:
  - my_component

parameters:
  components:
    my_component:
      url: https://github.com/projectsyn/component-example.git
      version: v1.2.4
----

NOTE: When following the default package structure we suggest defining all component dependencies in the `common.yml` class.

== Parameters

Most configuration packages will need some way to take input form the package user.
While users always have the option to extend and overwrite the configuration provided by the package, doing so is tedious and changes to the package easily break the user's configuration.

For this reason it's considered best practice to provide *Package Parameters* to configure the package.
Package parameters are very similar to Component parameters.
They provide a stable and concise interface for users to configure the package.
The package can then these parameters in the provided configuration.

> If a package decides to provide package parameter they __must__ be defined under the parameter key `pkg.<package-name>` and it __should__ provide parameter references in its documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a package decides to provide package parameter they __must__ be defined under the parameter key `pkg.<package-name>` and the package __should__ provide parameter references in its documentation.
```

=== `images`

If the package provides an option to configure container images versions, it's considered best practice to provide package parameter `images`.

The value of parameter `images` should be an object where each field name corresponds to a container image used by the component.
The value of each field should again be an object with fields `registry`, `repository`, and `tag`.
These fields should correspond to the container image registry, repository in that registry and image tag of the container image.

=== `charts`

If the package provides the option to expose the Helm chart versions and sources it's considered best practice to make them configurable in the parameter `charts`.
The value of this parameter should be an object, where each field corresponds to a Helm chart name and the value is another object with fields `source` and `version` indicating the chart repository and version to use for that chart.

[NOTE]
====
Unlike component parameters it isn't usually necessary to provide `images` and `charts` parameters for all used Docker images and Helm charts.
This is only necessary if:

> * The package defines images or charts that aren't in the component defaults

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The package uses images or charts that aren't in the component defaults
```

* The package needs to deviate from the components defaults
* An image or chart is used by multiple components and it's crucial that they use the same version.
====

== Example

With these best practices in mind, a package might look similar to the following example:

.`common.yml`
[source,yaml]
----
applications: <1>

>   - my_component

Reviewer: I'd expect this to be kebab-case for most components

```suggestion
  - my-component
```
